<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>DMT CV</title>
    </head>
    <body>
    <h1> Personal Introduction</h1>    
        <p><i> by Vanessa Koestner</i></p>
        
        <p> Hello everyone, this will be a short introduction about myself and my academic journey. </p>
        <p>This page will include:
        <ol>
            
            <li><i>Academic Journey</i></li>
            <li><i>Personal Information</i></li>
            <li><i>Interests</i></li>
        </ol>
        </p>
        
        <h2> Academic Journey</h2>
        <p> I'm a first generation student in my family, therefore, studying was always special to me. </p>
        <p> My journey began 2015 with my undergrate studies in<a href="https://www.uni-augsburg.de/de/fakultaet/philhist/professuren/anglistik-amerikanistik"> Anglistik/Amerikanistik</a> in Augsburg Germany. </p>
        <p> Through <b>years</b> of studying, I had the change to go abroad through the Erasmus program. I graped the chance and went to Limerick Ireland.</p>
        <p> I fell in love with the country and the <a href="https://www.mic.ul.ie/:"> Mary Immaculate College.</a></p>
        <p> I had the opportunity to extend my stay and worked at their German department as an intern and tutor.</p>
        <p> After I finished my stay, I came back to Germany and got ready to conquer my Bachleor degree.</p>
        <p> While working on my bachleor thesis, I started to work in our university library. There I was in charge of the digital scanning service, to provide scholars and students in Europe with digital texts from our university.</p>
        <p> I finished in the year 2021 my bachleor thesis on <i>Jane Austen’s Male Heroes:
            Between Restoration Rakes and Sentimental Men of Feeling</i>. </p>
        <p> With my new and fresh degree I decided to start working and got a job in Munich as a government worker.</p>
        <p> A year in and I knew, that it wasn't right for me and I want the whole abroad and studying expierence again. I always liked the Netherlands and when I found this master program, I did'nt hesitate and applied.</p>
        <p> And now I'm here!</p>

        <h2>Personal Information</h2>
        <p> Like mentioned above, I'm a German first genereation student, which was always fun, but certinly never easy.</p>
        <p> My family consist of my parents and my two younger siblings. They always encoured me to follow my path and a very excited to come for a visit now and then.</p>
        <p> Except from that, I work in a investment bank (still don't know much about stocks). I love travelling and food, so always happy to have a littel adventrue.</p>
    </body>
    

</html>